Tekstwetenschap 1
Inleiding en situering – deel 2
 Samenvatting deel 1
Tekst
• ‘stuk’ taal met een
communicatieve functie
• ingebed/functioneel in een
context
• met een textuur
• mogelijk multimodaal
• representatie en interactie
Discourse
• Teksten/taalgebruik van
een gemeenschap
• die sociale orde reflecteren
• die sociale orde creëren
• “Text is the material site of
emergence of immaterial
discourse(s). […] (Kress,
 Wetenschappelijk
onderzoek
 Discourse Analysis 1
• “One major approach to discourse analysis focuses on the study of
language in use, describing the ways in which lexical and grammatical
features are used in texts.” (Biber, 2012:191)
“In summary, the discourse analyst treats his data as the record (text)
of a dynamic process, in which language was used as an instrument of
communication in a context by a speaker/writer to express meanings
and achieve intentions (discourse).” (Brown and Yule 1983:26)
“Discourse analysis is a set of techniques for making connections
between texts and their meanings.” (Lemke, J., 2012:79)
“In order to move towards a thicker description, discourse analysis
needs a model which is rich in socio-cultural, institutional and
organizational explanation […] in order to answer the question ‘Why
are specific discourse-genres written and used by the specialist
communities the way they are?” (Bhatia, 1993:11)
 Discourse analysis 2
• “My view is that discourse is use of language seen as a form of social
practice, and discourse analysis is analysis of how texts work within
sociocultural practice. “ (Fairclough, 1995:7)
“Discourse analysis is the study of language in use. It is the study of
the meanings we give language and the actions we carry out when we
use language in specific contexts.” (Gee, J.P and M. Handford, 2012:
“The term [discourse analysis] names a large territory, located
somewhere between two ‘markers’, which might, generally speaking,
be something like ‘providing accounts of connected stretches of
language in use’ and ‘uncovering salient social, political, psychological
features in text-like entities’.” (Kress, G. 2012: 35)
 Twee brede kaders
• Sociale wetenschappen
• Hoe interpreteren we de
• (Socio)linguïstiek
• Hoe wordt taal gebruikt in
wereld?
• Onderzoeksobject =
communicatieve waarde
van acties, dingen, enz.
communicatie?
• Onderzoeksobject =
teksten
 Voorbeelden van onderzoek
Discourse in the novel.
Encoding and decoding in television discourse.
Towards an analysis of discourse: the English used by teachers and
pupils.
Therapeutic discourse: psychotherapy as conversation.
Story and discourse: narrative structure in fiction and film.
Discourse as an interactional achievement: some uses of ‘uhhuh’ and
other things that come between sentences.
Topic continuity in Discourse.
The discourse of medicine: dialectics of medical interviews.
Discourse markers.
Media discourse and public opinion on nuclear power: a
constructionist approach.
Language, power and ideology: studies in political discourse.
 Voorbeelden van onderzoek
Discourse and social change.
The West and the rest: discourse and power.
Reconstructing argumentative discourse.
Structure, sign and play in the discourse of human sciences.
Elite discourse and racism.
The Politics of environmental discourse.
Organizational discourse.
Genres and registers in discourse.
Image repair discourse and crisis communication.
Discourse in late modernity: rethinking critical discourse analysis.
Multimodal discourse: the modes and media of contemporary
communication
 Voorbeelden van onderzoek
The discourse of advertising.
Amusing ourselves to death: public discourse in the age of show
business.
Discourse and identity.
Talking voices: repetition, dialogue and imagery in conversational
discourse.
Language and power: an introduction to institutional discourse.
Methods of critical discourse analysis.
Dangerous Discourses of Disability, Subjectivity and Sexuality.
News as discourse.
Discourse in Web 2.0.
 Kwantitatieve benaderingen
• Corpusanalyse
• Sample van teksten uit een ‘domein’ of een context (politiek,
economie, wetenschappen; krant, literatuur, conversatie…)
• Registerstudie (Biber, Conrad)
o
o
“Language varies as its function varies; it differs in different
situations. The name given to a variety of a language distinguished
according to its use is register.” (Halliday et al., 1964:87)
“Different kinds of texts have different linguistic characteristics,
representing systematic patterns of variation that can be
investigated under the rubric of register: text varieties of a
language associated with particular situations of use.” (Biber, 2012:
• Business English, advertising language, krantentaal…
 Kwalitatieve benaderingen
• Ethnografie
• ‘teksten’ gebruikt door een ‘discourse community’ of in een type
van communicatieve interactie (sociale wetenschappers,
journalisten, …; commerciële transactie, les…)
• A discourse community
o
o
o
o
o
o
has a broadly agreed set of common public goals;
has mechanisms of intercommunication among its members;
uses its participatory mechanisms primarily to provide information
and feedback;
utilizes and hence possesses one or more genres in the
communicative furtherance of its aims;
has acquired some specific lexis;
has a threshold level of members with a suitable degree of relevant
content and discoursal expertise. (Swales, 1990:24-27)
 Kwalitatieve benaderingen (vervolg)
• Genre-analyse (Swales, Bhatia)
o
o
“As a working definition, genres have been characterized in [the
Sydney school] as staged, goal oriented social processes: social
since texts are always interactive events; goal oriented in that a text
unfolds towards its interactants’ purposes; stages, because it
usually takes more than one step to reach the goal.” (Rose, 2012:
“A genre comprises a class of communicative events, the members
of which share some set of communicative purposes. These
purposes are recognized by the expert members of the parent
discourse community and thereby constitute the rationale of the
genre. This rationale shapes the schematic structure of the
discourse and influences and constrains the choice of content and
• Research paper, sollicitatiebrief, overlijdensbericht, handboek…
 Opvolging les 1 en voorbereiding les 2
• Opvolging les 1
o
o
Hdbk: Lees hoofdstuk 1 (als je dat nog niet gedaan zou
hebben)
Toledo: vorm een groepje (zie course info voor
instructie) los de groepsopdracht op en stuur je
oplossing in: deadline zondag 12u00
• Voorbereiding les 2
o
o
Hdbk: Lees hoofdstuk 2
Toledo: probeer de voorbereidende vragen op te lossen
